Jehovah's Witnesses have won this
battle, but they have not won the war.
The facts are flatly against them.
They've managed to fool three people
on the Norwegian Supreme Court. They're
not going to fool everybody, and they're
not going to be able to maintain
these damaging, abusive policies
forever. Sooner or later, whether it's
this generation or the next generation
or the generation after that, someone is
going to realize actually cults
shouldn't be able to ruin people's
lives. We should not be giving money and
tax exemptions and charitable status to
groups that hurt people. Maybe we should
not be doing that.
Sooner or later, the penny is going to
drop.
Hello there. I'm Lloyd Evans. Welcome to
the upper room. It is Thursday, April
30th,
and today is
an historic day in the world of
Jehovah's Witnesses.
It is a day that Jehovah's Witnesses are
going to celebrate for quite some time
because it turns out that they have won
in their case against the Norwegian
government.
So the Norwegian Supreme Court has
released its verdict today.
It was a narrow majority but nonetheless
a majority. So there were five justices
or there are five justices in the
Norwegian Supreme Court and three of
them sided with Jehovah's Witnesses. Two
were against
and
that means Jehovah's Witnesses have won.
They have won their case against the
Norwegian government who can now no
longer deregister Jehovah's Witnesses as
a religion and withhold the subsidies to
which religions are entitled in Norway.
It's a hammer blow. It is for me and I'm
sure it is for many of you watching. I
just thought I would take some time to
look over the statement that was put
out. This is a summary statement uh in
English.
And there were a few things that I found
interesting and truthfully rather
frustrating.
I'm going to read some parts to you. The
state argued that the religious
community's practice of social shunning
violates children's rights and members
right to freely withdraw from
membership.
See section six of the religious
communities act and article 9 of the
European Convention on Human Rights.
Article nine of the European Convention
on Human Rights is critical really to
this case because what it says is that
everybody is free to practice their own
religion
and everybody is also free to change
their religion if they so wish. So, it's
kind of a a two-edged sword. It's a
it's a statute in human rights law that
Jehovah's Witnesses appeal based on in
many cases
because they feel that they have the
right to worship however they want
without any outside interference. But
the same article says that individuals
can leave or should be able to leave uh
a religion if they so choose. You can
ask yourselves or decide for yourselves
whether Jehovah's Witnesses are freely
able without any penalty or or
punishment
to leave their religion. Going on, it
reads, "As regards children's rights,
the Supreme Court unanimously found that
the state had not provided sufficient
evidence that in practice Jehovah's
Witnesses subject minor members to
psychological violence or negative
social control of such severity as to
constitute a violation of children's
statutory rights. The court attached
weight to the internal guidelines
governing the treatment of minors, the
fact that family ties are not severed,
and the absence of evidence
demonstrating any actual scope of
exclusions of children.
This is a tricky one because
I guess from the outset, if I'm being
brutally honest,
one of the weakest parts of this case
has been the way from an ex Jehovah's
Witness perspective has been this
principle of children being shunned. And
obviously what the religion can argue is
that shunning of minors doesn't really
happen in so far as if uh a child isn't
old enough to leave home and they are
removed from the congregation,
their parents still have contact with
them. They still live in the family
home. it's only when they're old enough
to leave home
that then there would be um a
restriction on contact.
So that's kind of a a difficult area to
argue. Now we can all think of examples
of how the rules on shunning
can make life terrible for even
children. Because let's be real,
Jehovah's Witnesses can get baptized
awfully young. And once you're baptized,
you are of course subject to the various
rules on dysfellowshipping. Now,
interestingly,
since the uh Norwegian litigation,
Jehovah's Witnesses have made it even
harder for
children in Jehovah's Witness families
to essentially be removed or
dysfellowshipped. So, they've kind of
given them at their own set of rules
where elders meet with the parents and
that sort of thing. and they've just put
a few more obstacles in place to make it
harder for children to get kicked out
essentially. But even with those extra
provisions that have been kind of
hastily
brought into play,
you still have psychological abuse in so
far as children are raised in families
knowing
that the moment they come of age,
they're going to be kicked out.
So if if you are for example a gay
Jehovah's Witness teenager,
you know the clock's ticking, you know.
So does your trauma that you're going
through knowing that the love of your
parents is conditional and that it's
only a matter of time before they hate
you for being who you are. Does that not
count?
Um, it seems that the arguments
surrounding that particular area may not
have been made
clearly and forcefully enough based on
at least what I'm reading. Having said
that, it's clear from elsewhere in this
summary that the court quite frankly
doesn't really know what it's talking
about.
So, it could be that actually the state
prosecutor did make a perfectly valid
argument about the um shunning policies
negative
consequences towards minors, but this
just wasn't properly understood by the
justices. Anyway, moving on. It says a
majority of three justices found that
the shunning practice does not
constitute undue pressure on members in
breach of article 9 of the European
Convention on Human Rights. particular
weight was attached to the fact that the
practice is rooted in the community's
doctrine,
is known to members upon joining
and entails no direct pressure, coercion
or threats.
This is where we get into difficulties.
This is what's going to sting, I would
imagine, for many of you watching
because this is just not true.
Were they not paying attention to the
evidence that was presented in front of
them? Or have have they just had their
decision decided for them by Watchtower
lawyers? Because that's what I'm reading
here.
Apparently,
as long as a practice is rooted in a
community's doctrine, that makes it
bulletproof. We don't have to question
it. So long as it's rooted in the
community's doctrine. How does that make
sense? Where's the logic there?
Um so long as the practice is known to
members upon joining. Again, members can
join as children.
Members are coerced into joining this
before they have developed critical
thinking skills.
And if you can demonstrate any amount of
coercion even if someone joins as an
adult, you can also argue that uh people
join without full knowledge or with
undue influence. And all of those things
can be said of Jehovah's Witness
teachings. So that part doesn't hold up
and entails no direct pressure, coercion
or threats. So apparently
pressure, coercion or threats need to be
direct.
What what does that mean? I guess we
need to read the full
the full findings to know what direct or
indirect means. But um apparently so
long as the pressure, coercion or
threats are indirect, that's just fine.
This is what's so infuriating about
this. It goes on, the shunning practice
does not apply to family members within
the same household
and family ties are not severed for
family members outside the household.
This is just factually not true. Were
the justices who came to this
conclusion, the three who overturned the
government's decision, were they not
paying any attention?
Did do they think that it it's just a
myth
that Jehovah's Witnesses get shunned
both inside and outside the household
once they are of legal age? Because when
we're we're no longer talking
specifically about minors here. We're
talking about Jehovah's Witnesses,
period.
And it's just demonstrably true. So, how
they've
what version of reality of are these
justices plugged into would would be my
question. Were they simply not paying
any attention?
On this basis, the majority found that
the conditions for refusing state
funding and registration under section
six of the religious communities act
were not met. So again, this is a a
majority decision specifically by three
justices. It goes on to talk about the
two justices who dissented. And this is
interesting.
This is where we start to kind of come
back to reality.
Two justices dissented on the question
of whether Jehovah's Witnesses subject
their members to undue pressure against
withdrawing from membership,
thereby violating members right to free
withdrawal.
The minority attached particular weight
to the fact that shunning may lead to
loss of contact with family members,
especially for minors. That's the exact
opposite of what we've just read.
It's the exact opposite. So who
Anyway,
it was also emphasized that shunning is
the result of a rules-based obligation
and is intended to be a tangible
consequence for those who leave. The
minority therefore considered that the
conditions for refusing state funding
and registration under section six of
the Religious Communities Act were met.
The minority further concluded that the
decision to refuse registration
constituted an interference with freedom
of religion under article 9 of the ECR
but that the interference was justified.
I'm a little bit confused there because
as far as I'm concerned it's not an
interference. It's completely in harmony
with uh article 9 in so far as article 9
makes it very clear that someone should
be allowed to leave their religion and
Jehovah's Witnesses very clearly don't
allow people to leave their religion. So
that's the summary and I can imagine
this will come as a crushing blow
as a source of deep frustration and
despair
for many like me who feel very invested
in this case because we know what's at
stake and we've we've lived it. We are
living it.
And so to have
three justices on the Norwegian Supreme
Court frankly invalidate our experience
and suggest that there's no such thing
as shunning
when they've had ample evidence laid
before them
is is shocking.
You might be wondering what happens
next. Where do we go from here? there's
got to be a a way forward. I don't think
there is a way forward. I think that in
this particular case,
Jehovah's Witnesses have succeeded.
Uh but I just want to read a few words.
This is important from my fear brochure.
You should not fear him. Why it's okay
to question the truth. Because
when I was writing this, it was a little
bit well, it was up in the air as to
what the decision of the Supreme Court
was going to be. And this gave me a
problem because it was like, how do I
write about something when I don't know
how it's going to end?
So, this is what I wrote. And it's
interesting that it still holds true
even after the verdict.
This is on page 20.
By late 2025, the dispute had reached
the country's Supreme Court with
hearings in February 2026,
ensuring that the final outcome would be
determined at the highest judicial
level.
Regardless of how the case ultimately
concludes,
one fact remains clear. Shunning was
considered sufficiently harmful to
warrant government intervention.
That intervention was not an attack on
religious belief, but a response to
practices objectively viewed as coercive
and damaging to family life.
And then I quote John 13:35. By this all
will know that you are my disciples if
you have love among yourselves.
and ask the question, can it honestly be
said that the words of Jesus in John
13:35 apply to Jehovah's Witnesses if
government authorities feel compelled to
intervene over cruel, unloving teachings
and practices.
And that's the point I think we should
be taking here.
Yes, Jehovah's Witnesses have won
through the help of the judiciary, but
it's the judiciary that are doing this,
not the government. The government felt
the need to intervene and in the end
they had their hands tied by the
Norwegian judiciary. Sometimes a
government can make mistakes and can
introduce laws that are wrong and
sometimes a judiciary can make mistakes.
Good example is in the United States
with their Supreme Court in the Row
versus Wade overturning.
So just because a Supreme Court of
whatever country
comes rallying to the
assistance of Jehovah's Witnesses in
what amounts to a cash grab. This is all
about money, isn't it? Subsidies and
religious
status. It's not about freedom of
worship because Jehovah's Witnesses were
never deprived freedom of worship in
Norway. It's purely about money. And the
Norwegian Supreme Court has come
rallying to the assistance of Jehovah's
Witnesses here and said, "Yes, we'll
keep giving you money. Don't worry.
Never mind that individuals are
suffering. We think that the religion is
more important than the individual." The
Norwegian government saw it correctly
that actually individuals do matter and
mental health is important.
They just had their hands tied by three
people. Three people on a Supreme Court
panel.
And that's sad.
But unfortunately, these things happen.
The good news is that Norway proves
that
legislators,
that government officials are paying
attention. We're seeing this also in the
UK with Sam Carling and the work he's
trying to do in bringing these issues
right into the House of Commons for
discussion. Slowly but surely, we are
going to see progress. Unfortunately, we
haven't seen it here. Jehovah's
Witnesses have won this battle, but they
have not won the war.
The facts are flatly against them.
They've managed to fool three people on
the Norwegian Supreme Court. They're not
going to fool everybody.
And they're not going to be able to
maintain
these damaging abusive policies forever.
Sooner or later, whether it's this
generation or the next generation or the
generation after that, someone is going
to realize actually cult shouldn't be
able to ruin people's lives. We should
not be giving money and tax exemptions
and charitable status to groups that
hurt people. Maybe we should not be
doing that.
Sooner or later, the penny is going to
drop. Unfortunately,
that hasn't been today. I hope some of
my comments have been useful. I wish I
could bring you better news,
but not everything, not every story has
a happy ending. Sometimes
we've just got to
ride the the es and flows of history
and make sure that we look after our own
mental health and not and try not to
take things too personally. No matter
what decision has been made in Norway,
it doesn't affect the facts and the
facts will always be on our side. So
viewers, I hope you found this
information helpful. Don't forget that
you can find more information on
lloydonline.org.
But for now, that's all I have for you.
Thank you so much for watching.
But it's finally over.
Finally over.
Got to last one minute just to get away.
So I keep it together.
Thinking it's not forever.